Anh Le
PS 745: PE Core
Professor Beramendi
Proposal #2: The effect of electoral authoritarianism on violence
I. Introduction
Once disregarded as mere ``window-dressing'', authoritarian institutions have garnered the attention of scholars as an important tool for power sharing, which, in turn, leads to various substantive effect, including regime survival, increased investment, better economic performance.

While our understanding of authoritarian institution has branched to numerous substantive topics, its causal root deserves more careful studies. Given its common definition as the ``rule of the game'', institutions are fundamentally a set of constraints of human interactions, and thus its effect must be most evident in the interaction between the strategic actors itself.  When scholars study the effect of institutions on various substantive areas, inevitably the causal chain must pass through the strategic actions of the actors, mostly through the logic of credible and regular spoil sharing (cite Przworski, Svolik). This causal step is theoretically crucial to all of our findings regarding authoritarian institutions – the goal of this article is, therefore, to empirically examine it.

Beyond its theoretical contribution, a study of violence in partially liberalized dictatorship has immense real-world importance. Indeed, violence during political liberalization is the greatest concern of many would-be democrats living under authoritarian regimes. For example, Chinese citizens show overwhelming enthusiasm when asked about democratic features such as popular accountability, separation of power, and political liberalism, yet remain consistently cautious of instability caused by transition (Chu 2008, 309). Understanding whether and why countries experience increased violence during liberalization is crucial for the prospect of democracy.

II. Argument and structure

This article argues that if the authoritarian legislature is indeed a credible commitment and informational device, then we should see decreased level of violence between the regime and the dissdent in the presence of an authoritarian legislature. Indeed, taking a page from the rationalist war literature, I explains how political violence should only happen when the regime and the opposition misjudge one another's capacity and preference. Given transparent information and a commitment device, regardless of the capacity and preference of both sides, negotiating to reach an agreement is always preferable to violence due to the savings in the social cost of violence.

Armed with this theoretical argument, I empirically examine the level of violence in regime-dissident interaction using a novel event dataset across authoritarian regime post Cold War. I constructed the data by looking explicitly at countries that create their legislature during their authoritarian spells and matched these countries with those of the same conditions but did not create legislature. In addition to this large-n investigation, I zoom in at the causal mechanism with a survey experiment implemented in Vietnam, a hard case for the theory of legislature on regime-dissident interaction. These studies show that blah blah blah.

The article will proceed as follows:

II. Theory: Authoritarian legislature and its effect on political violence

1. Legislature reducing violence

To consider whether violent means is chosen to reach their goal, we need a theoretical framework to understand how the opposition and the regime engage in the bargaining game. A possible starting point is the bargaining models developed for democratic legislatures, where bargaining outcomes are driven by various institutional rules (positive and negative rule, sequencing of these powers, first-mover advantage, etc.) (Baron and Ferejohn 1989; Cox 2006). However, this type model is not suited to analyze the bargaining under an authoritarian regime, where the institutional rules themselves are under constant threat of being revised by the final arbiter that is violence. In other words, the end game of legislative bargaining now has an extra node that is whether either side will violently suppress the other’s demand. Given this context, the decision of the autocrat and the opposition is better characterized as a bargaining game in anarchy, very much like the bargaining between two sovereign states with the option of going to war (Fearon 1995).

To formally model the interaction, let the negotiation between the opposition and the regime be about the share x (0 < x < 1) of a good (normalized as 1) given to the opposition. (For concreteness we can think of this as the share of the economy’s rent or capital stock). Both sides have the option 1) to bargain and decide on x, or 2) to engage in violent protest / repression. Violence is costly compared to peaceful negotiation—we call this difference in relative cost cA and cO for the autocrat and the opposition, respectively. If violence happens, whichever side emerges victorious decides the share x to his heart’s desire—i.e. the winning autocrat would give 0 to the opposition and the winning opposition would give 1 to itself.
Given the uncertain nature of collective action battles, the utility of engaging in violence for the two sides is best formulated as an expected utility that depends on the probability of the opposition winning (call this probability p). Thus, the expected utility of the opposition is p –cO, while the expected utility of the ruling regime is 1 – p – cA. These two expected utilities sum to less than one, which raises the puzzle why the two sides fail to engage in ex-ante bargaining that splits the difference, giving both sides a higher payoff than the expected utility of violence. Indeed, any amount of x between (p – cO, p + cA), i.e. the bargaining range, is more desirable than violence to both sides.
Yet war happens between states and so does violence under authoritarian regimes. The international relations literature suggests three factors that may lead to violence, all of which having a legislature can help alleviate.
1) Information asymmetry regarding p
Due to the incentive to bluff, both sides only have incomplete information about the capability of the other. This leads to differing estimate of p, leading to non-overlapping preferences. This information asymmetry can be alleviated by having an elected legislature that helps the autocrat identify the collective action capability of the opposition. During regular legislative sessions, the regime can observe the position of opposition legislators to gauge their unity strength. Furthermore, during elections, both sides’ mobilization effort provides information to the other about its collective action capability without actually resorting to violence. The real, competitive stake of these elections also means that both sides are exerting its best effort, reducing the risk of bluffing and deception. Therefore, the autocrat can trust the information it receives about the opposition’s capability (p), and consequently has a better idea about the political constraint that it faces.
2) The bargaining range (p – cO, p + cA) depends on the value of cO and cA
Having an elected legislature can also increase cA and cO, i.e. the cost of violence compared to peaceful negotiation. First, elections provide the opposition with a platform to influence policy making without resorting to violence (Rigger 1999, 14). Despite inevitable electoral manipulations, voters still know who the candidates are and can vote in support of their message. While these votes will not dethrone the regime, they serve as an informal referendum that alerts the regime about the popularity of its policies. In this way, the opposition can influence the agenda without winning the election itself. Indeed, if participation in the electoral game proves to be an attractive option to the opposition, radicalizing becomes relatively more costly as a means of gaining influence.
Second, in Dahlian terms, elections also tempt the ruling regime to stay within the institutionalized game by raising the cost of repression (Dahl 1971, 15). Indeed, elections “open up avenues of collective protest” by creating convergent social expectations that are both large in scope (affecting all citizens) and concentrated in time frame (Schedler 2009). Furthermore, by participating in elections, the opposition builds up its organizational strength, which can be used to mobilizing votes as well as organizing protest (Thompson and Kuntz 2004).
In addition, upholding elections and institutional bargaining is an attractive option for regimes to build their legitimacy and assuage grievances about past infractions (Lindberg 2009, 339). By adapting its policies based on election results, the regime can also bring its position closer to the popular will in incremental steps, each with acceptable cost. Indeed, it is not contradictory to say that an authoritarian regime may protect voters’ rights or respond to their demands as a strategy for the regime to stay in power, because there are often hard-liners and reformists within the regime. If the reformists’ strategy of electoral engagement proves to be a successful alternative to maintain power, more members of the regime will be tempted to become liberal-minded.
3) Unit indivisibility: the contested good may not be divided continuously
A final possibility that leads to violence is that the opposition and the ruling regime may be fighting over issues that cannot be continuously divided. For example, were the contested issue about whether religious law should be adopted, it may not be possible to split the issue space to arrive at a compromise within the (p – cO, p + cA) range. An elected legislature again ameliorates this problem. By providing an arena in which both sides can engage in multiple negotiations along many policy issues, it provides more opportunities for side payments. In contrast, were the opposition shut out of the policy making entirely, the only way they could gain influence is to arouse the populace to violent protest. The best way to do so is not via a nuanced discussion of multiple policy points but an intense focus on a highly contentious issue, further exacerbating the problem of unit indivisibility. Therefore, we should expect elected legislature to provide better opportunities for negotiation.

In sum, the overarching of over these causal mechanisms is that the elected legislature provides an arena for the ruling and the opposition to interact, gain information, and adjust strategies. In game theoretic sense, by lengthening the horizon and improve the regularity of stakes, repeated interaction encourage players to think about the future and deter the temptation to radicalize. Overall, these effects encourage incremental changes over radical tactic and favor cooperation over defection (Axelrod 1984). This leads to our hypothesis that:

H1: Authoritarian regimes that create a legislature will experience less violence in its interaction with the dissidents.

2. Legislature increasing violence
Throughout the previous model, it is implied that the actors’ utility functions remain static with the only parameters being the cost of violence and the share of the issue space. Yet this assumption may miss the dynamism of the opposition’s democratic expectation, which becomes increasingly demanding as the regime starts liberalizing.

Speaking about this issue, Ted Gurr hypothesizes, “The potential for collective violence varies strongly with the intensity and the scope of relative deprivation among members of a collectivity.” Relative deprivation, in turn, is defined as the perceived discrepancy between value expectation (what people believe they are entitled to) and value capability (what the people believe they are able to attain) (1970, 24). Seen under this light, repeated elections may increase the potential for political violence by raising the democratic expectation, which can lead to violent protest if unfulfilled. The effect of elections is especially potent because it affects all citizens, thus raising not only the intensity but also the scope of relative deprivation.

Indeed, unfulfilled political expectation is a common case of relative deprivation causing violence. Historical examples are numerous, spanning various time periods as well as scopes of conflict: from the Puritan Revolution of 1640-60, which was sparked by attempts of the Stuart kings to reinstate royal absolutism, to the protest in twentieth-century colonies, which often followed the imposition of restrictions after a period of political liberalization (1970, 115). This pattern makes sense because, when people have tasted freedom, not only do they want more rights but they also consider rights more important. In other words, the opposition may not simply optimize its share of the issue space but also develops a minimum level of acceptable concession. If opposition’s expectation rises too quickly, the ruling regime may not have enough time to appropriate adjust their position especially if the hard-liners are also trying to retrench given signs of a political spiral. For this reason, it is plausible that electoral authoritarianism leads to more violent interaction between the ruling regime and the opposition.

II. Empirics

1. Introducing the database

Using a dataset of machine coded news reports around the world from 1991-2001, I am able to look at individual events that happened between the regime and the dissident, enabling an analysis at a highly granular level. These event data come from ICEWS (Integrated Crisis Early Warning System), a project funded by DARPA (Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency) to aid the US policy makers in predicting and responding to crises around the world . These news articles are harvested from “over 75 international sources (AP, UPI, and BBC Monitor) as well as regional sources (India Today, Jakarta Post, Pakistan Newswire, and Saigon Times),” ensuring comprehensive coverage  (cite O'Brien 2010 (94), 2013). These text data are then processed with Schrodt's TABARI event data coding system to determine the nature and the intensity of the reported political activity. In addition, the event is matched with a dictionary of actors (with over 8,000 entries) that further divides into five broad categories: religious, governmental, dissidents, business, and other. In sum, from this database I am able to extract any interaction between the government and the dissident, where and when it happens, and its level of violence (measured by the Goldstein score\footnote{The Goldstein score is a measure of intensity of conflict or cooperation, developed by Joshua S. Goldstein, "A Conflict-Cooperation Scale for WEIS Events Data," Journal of Conflict Resolution, 36, 2 (June 1992). The score has values from -10 (Military attack; clash; assault), 0 (Explain or state policy; state future position) to 8.3(Extend military assistance)} See Goldstein 375 for how the event types are coded into this scale).

2. Empirical strategy



I look at authoritarian years that don't have legislature, then flip and get legislature. This is better than simply counting the authoritarian years with legislature, because a historical examination quickly reveals that in a lot of cases, these legislatures simply survived from an earlier regime and gutted (but not abolished by the new regime.) This does not comport with the argument of legislature being a genuine power sharing device.

III. Observational study
1. Dependent variable: To measure violence in the regime-opposition interaction, I take advantage of an extensive database include all news reports on an action by an actor to another from January 01, 2001 and December 31, 2011.1
2. Independent variable: To measure electoral authoritarianism, I count the number of year (in the previous 10 years) that a regime receives a score of 4 or more on the indicator Electoral Rules in the Database of Political Institutions (DPI).2
3. Control variables (other things that may affect the level of violence)
Geddes’ regime types: different regime types may have different cost of repression and cost of toleration 
Economic development: violence is more costly if it disrupts a healthy economy
Economic growth: an economic slowdown is politically disruptive
Natural resources: an economy based on resources extraction suffers less from violence that an economy relying on investment
Region: dummy for 1) Middle East and North Africa (exceptionally more violent) and 2) Central and Eastern Europe (post-Communist experience)
Duration of regime: more durable regime may have tighter control
Military expenditure: controlling for the regime’s capability of repression

IV. Experimental study
Even if the observational study demonstrates the anticipated effect on the outcome variable of violence, it does not fully prove that the entire posited causal mechanism is correct. With an experimental survey design we can investigate the calculus of the relevant actors and thus finely test each step in the causal chains. Two crucial links in the posited models 1 and 2 are:
Having an elected legislature actually prompts the co-opted elites to participate in the forum. Otherwise, if the opposition does not consider the legislature to be an effective arena for policy change, then neither can the legislative bargaining provide an attractive alternative to violence nor can the regime gain information about the opposition’s capability.
Having an elected legislature raises the democratic expectation of the opposition, leading them to demand more rights and representation.
Conceptually, the treatment is a country “having an elected legislature,” which cannot be randomized. However, in our survey design we can prompt the respondents to think (with different levels of intensity) about the legislature as a bargaining arena. In the following section I discuss why Vietnam is an appropriate case to conduct our survey experiment.
1. The case of Vietnam’s legislature and business
Like China, Vietnam has liberalized its economy while resisting political liberalization. In its 1992 Constitution, drafted when economic reform was already started, the Vietnamese Communist Party (VCP) asserted its role as the vanguard party that commanded the leadership role of the country. At the same time, economic liberalization has created a new class of private entrepreneurs, whose growth becomes increasingly crucial to the country’s prosperity and the regime’s stability especially when the state-owned sector continues to sluggishly perform. 
Given this mismatch between political and economic power, Vietnam is an insightful case study of the co-optation theory with the new class of capitalists being the potential opposition. Indeed, after the 1992 Constitutional revision, the Vietnamese National Assembly (VNA) has included more diverse and assertive, amending law proposed by the executive, albeit without rejecting it. The representation of businessmen and women in the National Assembly has also increased. In 2007 only 1 out of 30 self-nominated candidates won seat in the VNA, while in 2011 4 out of 15 candidates won seats, including two of the country’s best known capitalists.
Given the increasingly active role of the VNA and the representation of entrepreneurs, do businesses actually use the VNA to inform the ruling regime about their preference? Or do these signs of liberalization only whet their appetite to demand more change? To investigate these claims we can set up a vignette survey experiment as follows.
2. The experimental design
What we are measuring:
(Information sharing) Do you think that contacting VNA representative is an effective way to communicate your policy preference to the central government?
(Democratic expectation) Do you think that there is adequate representation of business in the VNA?
Survey treatment:
Control group: no prompt about the legislature
“We would like to learn more about how business participates in the process of economic policy-making of the central government.”
Treatment group 1: a prompt about the increasing representativeness and power of the legislature
“We would like to learn more about how business participates in the process of economic policy-making of the central government. In the recent years, the VNA has become more active in legislative debate and included representatives from more diverse background, including self-nominated candidate.”
Treatment group 2: a prompt about businessmen in the VNA
“We would like to learn more about how business participates in the process of economic policy-making of the central government. In the recent years, the VNA has become more active in legislative debate and included representatives from more diverse background, including self-nominated candidate, many of which are businessmen.”
Why this works:
The randomness of treatment is guaranteed by design. Given the background information of business, we can also investigate the difference of the effect size across subgroups (i.e. large versus small enterprises, business that is or is not an association member, etc.). Last year survey received 8,000 responses, providing us with a large sample size to detect the treatment effect
The business survey on the quality of governance is already conducted annually, raising no concern that the business may respond differently since they are aware of being studied (i.e. the Hawthorne effect)
While the treatment is not explicitly about violence, it tests two prior links in the causal chain. Furthermore, by not mentioning directly violence or other means of collective action, we do not have to worry about business giving false response for fear of persecution. (Note that the survey is already anonymous.)
The question directly asks about ways to influence policy-making at the central level so that we can really prompt the respondent to think about the effect of the VNA instead of other ways to influence policy at the local level.
